Add blog about files plugin improvements in Spyder (#39)
Quansight-Labs/quansight-labs-site: posts/2019/11/Files-Improvements.md

<!--
.. title: File management improvements in Spyder4
.. slug: File-management-improvements-in-Spyder4
.. date: 2019-11-01 12:00:00 UTC-05:00
.. author: Juanita Gomez & Gonzalo Peña
.. tags: Labs, Spyder
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

> Spyder 4.0 is almost ready! It has been in the making for 1.5 years, and it contains lots of interesting new features. In this post we will focus on the files plugin where several improvements have been made regarding file management and interface. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spyder 4.0 is almost ready! It has been in the making for well over a year and a half, and it contains lots of interesting new features. We will focus on the Files pane in this post, where we've made several improvements have been made regarding file management and interface. 
```

Reviewer: * Spell out small numbers of years
* Prefer active voice, especially for blog posts
* The plugins are called "Panes" in the actual Spyder UI and are in sentence case, and calling them "plugins" (while accurate from a Spyder developer perspective) may confuse regular users into thinking they are optional add-ons, as that term usually refers to. Its also consistent with all the blogs, docs, UI text, guides, etc., that I wrote.
* Missing some commas

Also, @goanpeca or @ccordoba12 can confirm, but development on the Spyder 4 `master` branch was already well underway by the time I joined the team in the fall of 2017, well over 2 years ago, and I'm pretty sure quite a bit longer.

![Pane Menu](/images/spyder-files-pane-menu.png)
<!-- TEASER_END -->

![Header Menu](/images/spyder-files-header-menu.png)

## Custom file associations

First, we added the possibility to associate different external applications to open specific file extensions. By going to the “Files” option in the preferences window, it is possible to set the file associations by, selecting the File Types and the Associated applications that should be used to open this specific file extensions. 

![File associations](/images/spyder-files-file-associations.png)

Once this configuration is set you can go to the files pane in Spyder and whenever you open a file with the selected extension, it will open automatically with the selected associated application. Additionally, when you right click a file with one of this extensions, you will find an “open with” option that will show the application associated for this extension.

![Open With](/images/spyder-files-open-with.png)

> ## Single click open on file explorer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Single click open option
```

* Use correct UI name
* Remove redundant mention of Files pane for conciseness and consistency with the other headings

Another improvement made was the option to open files and directories with a single click which was not possible before because files and folders could only be opened by double clicking them. In order to enable this option, go to the files tab in the preferences window, check the box “Single click to open files” and apply the changes. With this set, now only a single click is needed to open a file externally or in Spyder, from the files tab. 

![Single click](/images/spyder-files-single-click.png)

Bear in mind that changing this configuration option will also affect the behaviour of the Project Explorer pane.

## Open files externally

Additionally, we added a context menu action called Open externally to open files with the Operating System default program associated with the file type. To use this action, go to the file you want to open in the files tab and right-click it to see the context menu. Then select “Open Externally” and the file will be opened outside Spyder, with the default program associated with its file type, depending on the Operating System.

![Open Externally](/images/spyder-files-open-externally.png)

> Moreover, now it is possible to select several files to perform a specific action thanks to the multi-select functionality added. For this, press CTRL or SHIFT and Click on the files that are going to be selected without releasing the CTRL/SHIFT. It is also possible to select the files without doing it one by one, but selecting a file with the CTRL/SHIFT clicked and selecting a not contiguous file to this one which will select all the files between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, it is now possible to select more than one file on which to perform a context menu action, thanks to the Files pane's new multi-select functionality. For this, press `Ctrl` (`Cmd` on macOS) or `Shift` while clicking on the files to select, just as you would in your operating system's file manager (Windows Explorer, macOS Finder, etc). As you'd expect, `Ctrl` (`Cmd`) selects individual files one by one, while `Shift` selects all the files between the one you click and the one previously selected.
```

* Make keyboard shortcuts verbatim, title case and cross platform
* Fix capitalization
* Clarify and simplify explanations and remove redundancy and awkwardness
* More clearly and accurately explain behavior
* Reinforce standard user expectations from using their regular file manager
* Fix grammar
* Use proper UI names

> By doing this, it is possible to execute some of the actions available in the context menu for all the files selected including delete, rename, move, copy and open externally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've selected multiple files, it is now possible to execute many of the actions available in the context menu on all the selected files, including delete, rename, move, copy and open externally.
```

* Add needed comma
* Simplify and clarify explanation
* Fix grammar
* Use more positive language

![Select Files](/images/spyder-files-select-files.png)

## Absolute and relative path handling

> Another functionality added was the ability to copy and paste files and their absolute or relative paths. To access these actions, go to the context menu by right-clicking a file in the files tab. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spyder 4 now allows you to easily copy the absolute or relative paths of one or more files in the `Files` pane and pasting them as intelligently-formatted text anywhere else in Spyder. Just right-clicking any file or files in the Files or Project panes and select the desired option.
```

* Combine with the following block for better flow
* Make description more accurate
* Prefer active voice
* Clarify and simplify explanation
* Use standardized terminology and match UI text

![Copy Path](/images/spyder-files-copy-path.png)

> With this, a file can be copied from the files tab and pasted anywhere else directly from Spyder. The “Copy Absolute Path” and “Copy Relative Path” actions, give us access to the files’ path, to be pasted as text. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond just copying a single path, when pasting more than one Spyder will intelligently format it into a comma-separated collection of quoted strings, one path per line, that can be pasted directly into a list with no additional formatting needed,
```

* Removed unclear and redundant information that was already incorporated in the revised paragraph above
* Added missing description of a major part of this feature, automatic formatting of multiple file paths into a list of strings

It would be nice to have an image to illustrate the multiple file list functionality (not sure if this already does); we spent a ton of time on that and it was by far the most sophisticated part of this feature.

> This way, when pasting the absolute path of a file, we get the complete path of the file starting from the root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Copy Absolute Path` option gets us the complete path of each selected file, starting from the drive root.
```

* Fix grammar
* Clarify explanation
* Make description more accurate
* Use proper UI text and terminology
* Use verbatim instead of quotes

![Absolute Path](/images/spyder-files-absolute-path.png)

> When using the option “Copy Relative Path”, we get the path of the file relative to the directory in which we are located.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, `Copy Relative Path` gets us the path of the file relative to the current working (displayed in the top right of the Spyder window).
```

* Fix grammar
* Clarify explanation
* Make description more accurate
* Use proper UI text and terminology
* Use verbatim instead of quotes

![Relative Path](/images/spyder-files-relative-path.png)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## File type icons

```

* Add missing header, as this does not belong in the "Absolute and relative path handling" section and is an entirely separate feature

> Finally, files are now displayed along with icons depending on their file type. There are different icons for each programming language file extension, including c, cpp, csharp, java, python, r, swift, for each different file type including jpg, mp3, m4a and other file extensions including txt and tex. This allows the users to visually identify what type of file they are seeing in the files pane, in order to select the correct associated applications to open these files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, files in the `Files` pane are now displayed with icons depending on their type. There are custom icons for the source files of a variety of common programming languages including C C++, C Sharp, Java, Python, R, and Swift; for media types like JPEG, MP3, and M4A; and for other common extensions such as `.txt` and `.tex`. This allows you to identify file types with just a glance and select the appropriate application accordingly.
```

* Fix confusing mix of language names and extensions for programming language source files
* Organize list and make it make much more sense
* Fix bad commas and comma splices
* Clarify and simplify explanations and remove redundancy and awkwardness
* Fix grammar
* Use "you" phrasing to put the focus on the reader as the user

![File Extensions](/images/spyder-files-file-extensions.png)

> With this new features added to Spyder's file management behavior and UI design in the files plugin, we think we achieved to improve the experience of the user managing files in Spyder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these new features and UI options in Spyder's `Files` pane, we hope you will enjoy the improved file management experience coming in Spyder 4! We would like to thank Quansight, our donors, and most of all our dedicated users and contributors from around the world for making these features possible. The final version will be released very soon, but if you'd like to try it out now and share your feedback, follow the instructions on our [Github](https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/releases). Happy Spydering!
```

* Fix many grammar and syntax errors
* Avoid repetition, awkwardness and redundancy
* Use standard terminology
* Use correct names from the UI text
* Add thank you to Quansight, donors and users
* Add call to action for users to try out these new features, and put them into context of when they land in Spyder

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<!--
.. title: Files Improvements Spyder4

> .. slug: Files-Improvements

Reviewer 2: you can make this match the title

.. date: 2019-11-01 12:00:00 UTC-05:00
.. author: Juanita Gomez & Gonzalo Peña
.. tags: Labs, Spyder
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

> # Files Improvements Spyder4

Reviewer 2: this isn't needed, the title will be inserted by Nikola

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a sentence more for introduction would be good. Something like: "Spyder 4.0 is almost ready. It has been in the making for 1.5 (?) years, and contains lots of interesting new features. In this post we will focus on ...."

> For version 4 of Spyder several improvements have been made regarding file management and visualization. 

Reviewer 2: Start with "For Spyder 4.0"?

Reviewer 2: Question about the "and visualization" - did you mean something specific? It doesn't really come back in the rest of the post. Is it the UI design of the file manager, or something else?

Author: I meant things like the file explorer simplified interface and the icons according to the file extensions (which I guess are part of the interface too). Maybe the word visualization could be replaced with "interface"? What do you think?

Reviewer: The issue is at least in English in the data analysis field, the above sentence would almost invariably be read to refer to _data_ visualization (e.g. Plots panel, etc). "Interface" is closer to what you mean, but it cannot be grammatically used as is in this context without changing the sentence. I suggest just such a revision in the review I'm about to submit.

## Simplified interface

In order to simplify the file explorer interface, by default now the columns corresponding to size and kind are hidden. This feature can be activated or deactivated by either accessing the Pane Menu or by right clicking the header directly. In both, cases you can select which columns to display in the file explorer.

![Pane Menu](/images/spyder-files-pane-menu.png)

> 

Reviewer 2: could you add the `TEASER` tag here? (see README in the root of the repo)

![Header Menu](/images/spyder-files-header-menu.png)

> ## Custom File Associations

Reviewer 2: minor: for consistency, I suggest to capitalize the first word only

First, we added the possibility to associate different external applications to open specific file extensions. By going to the “Files” option in the preferences window, it is possible to set the file associations by, selecting the File Types and the Associated applications that should be used to open this specific file extensions. 

![File associations](/images/spyder-files-file-associations.png)

> Once this configuration is set you can go to the files pane in spyder and whenever you open a file with the selected extension, it will open automatically with the selected associated application. Additionally, when you right click a file with one of this extensions, you will find an “open with” option that will show the application associated for this extension.

Reviewer 2: minor: `spyder` -> `Spyder` (also further down in the post)

Additionally, we added a context menu action called Open externally to open files with the Operating System default program associated with the file type. To use this action, go to the file you want to open in the files tab and right-click it to see the context menu. Then select “Open Externally” and the file will be opened outside spyder, with the default program associated with its file type, depending on the Operating System.

![Open Externally](/images/spyder-files-open-externally.png)

Moreover, now it is possible to select several files to perform a specific action thanks to the multi-select functionality added. For this, press CTRL or SHIFT and Click on the files that are going to be selected without releasing the CTRL/SHIFT. It is also possible to select the files without doing it one by one, but selecting a file with the CTRL/SHIFT clicked and selecting a not contiguous file to this one which will select all the files between them.
By doing this, it is possible to execute some of the actions available in the context menu for all the files selected including delete, rename, move, copy and open externally.

![Select Files](/images/spyder-files-select-files.png)

> ## Files absolute and relative path handling

Reviewer 2: remove "Files"
